Proposal:

Can online real estate listings serve as a proxy for resident's
perceptions of neighborhoods?

In the long history of the ecological effects of neighborhood, we have
faced the perennial problem of how to practically define the
neighborhood as an object of study. Since we think about the
neighborhood as an area defined by how people interact with it and
within it, we have often been tempted to let people define
neighborhoods for us.

However, when we ask people to define their neighborhoods we run into
a robust social fact. People have a very hard time drawing the
boundaries of their neighborhood, and if we can elicit two definitions
of neighborhood areas, they are are almost certain to disagree.

Typically when faced with such variation, we respond by averaging
responses together to estimate the central tendency. However, in the
case of neighborhoods, we would need a very large sample in order to
get a stable estimate given that the size of some named neighborhoods
are quite small. As far as I know, no such a large sample has never
been drawn.

However, it may be possible to use data on where people claim a real
estate listing is located as a measure of people's perceptions of
neighborborhoods. The obvious virture of such data is their volume,
and if it is not too inaccurate, it could allow for a very high
resolution cognitive map of a city.

For the past yeasr, every night, I download Chicago Craigslist
apartment, rental, sublet and roommate listings. When a persons posts
a listing, they have the option of putting in an address or
intersection. This allows me to associate latitude and longitude with
a posting. They also have the option of entering, in free text, the
``Specific location'' of the posting.

People interpret ``Specific location'' in different ways, but most
people put in the name of a neighborhood.  With these data, I can
estimate how likely that a listing will say that a location is in the
neighborhood. 

Clearly, we should expect there to be many biases in these data, but
we do not know how extreme. If these data should prove usable, then we
would have a powerful and inexpensive way of getting at how people
divide up their cities. 

In order to evaluate these data, we must compare it to data that we
expect to be generally unbiased. In the 1994 Project on Human
Development in Chicago Neighborhoods Community Survey, the second and
third questions asked the respondents the name of the neighborhood and
to define it's boundaries. If I had these, or similar data, I could
characterized the nature and extent of bias of the real estatle
listing data.
